Introduction / What is it: Dense Reconstruction with a Single Moving Camera
The objective of this project is to implement a system capable of transforming a standard 2D video stream from a single moving camera into a dense, photorealistic 3D model following the pipeline presented in the paper “Live Dense Reconstruction with a Single Moving Camera” (Newcombe R., Davison A.). While our prior affine SfM results in a sparse point cloud reconstruction, the Newcombe and Davison approach aims for a complete surface representation. This involves the creation of a dense framework that estimates depth for every pixel, allowing for complex interactions such as occlusions and physical collisions in augmented reality. This will be done through the following pipeline:


The pipeline we will replicate consists of the following 5 (optionally 6) stages: 
(0) Keyframe / bundle selection (section 2.7, done w/ library)
(1) Structure from Motion (section 2.2)
(2) Base Surface Construction (section 2.3)
(3) View-predictive Optical Flow (section 2.5) 
(4) Constrained Scene Flow (section 2.4)
(5) Depth Map Integration (section 2.6)


Motivation
Implementing the Newcombe and Davison pipeline synthesizes core concepts—optical flow, projection models, epipolar constraints, and 3D reconstruction—into a single, robust framework. It progresses beyond affine SfM by transitioning from sparse, orthographic assumptions to a dense, perspective-based system. This project provides a practical path for generating high-fidelity, real-time 3D surfaces from standard camera data, while simultaneously serving as a nice capstone to the course involving the use of many different concepts we’ve discussed.


Furthermore, this model has some practical applications as it constructs a highly detailed 3D representation in real-time. For example, the authors of the paper demonstrated such as with “advanced mobile robotic platforms which aim to interact with and manipulate a scene” (Newcombe & Davison). It can also be used to perform more advanced AR as it allows both environmental interaction (as a physics simulation can be run on the reconstruction), and the ability to simulate occlusion.


Relevant Theory / Methods
We will use SfM to estimate the projection matrix for each camera in a camera bundle and obtain a sparse 3D point cloud; this can be accomplished using an open source implementation of PTAM. We will then fit this cloud with a smooth base mesh using either Poisson or MSCSRBF (Ohtake, A. Belyaev, and H.-P. Seidel). By texturing it with the reference image and rendering it into a comparison view, we obtain a prediction of the image which that camera generated that can be used to obtain a sub-pixel accurate optic flow field allowing us to pinpoint the location of a given point within the actual image generated by said camera.
To perform our refinement of the 3D reconstruction, we first trace the ray corresponding to each pixel in the reference image, and find the 3D point where said ray intersects with the surface given by our base mesh, obtaining a vertex Xj for each pixel in the reference image. Using our optic flow field we can then determine the pixel coordinates of each vertex Xj in each of the comparison images, which allows us to then find the displacement of where the current vertex would project into the image and the point where said vertex lies on the actual image which we can call delta_u, using a first-order taylor approximation, we can then solve for the 3D displacement as delta_u = J*delta_x, by restricting the change in Xj to lie along its corresponding projective ray, we can determine that we only need to solve for a single parameter “lambda” which determines how Xj moves along the ray, we can update Xj. By doing this over the course of multiple (at least 3) iterations we gradually refine each Xj to be reasonably accurate, we then obtain a depth map (as each vertex corresponds to a single pixel), which we use to compute a denoised version of the depth map giving us the final position of each vertex, which we then triangulate to obtain a “final” mesh for the current keyframe. Then once the camera shows a “novel view”, we perform this all over again to obtain another depth map, which is then fused into the current global representation by removing all vertices which are too close to each other, and then retriangulating.


Materials
Single RGB Camera, and possible materials/setting for various stationary scenes.


Goals and one stretch goal
Our main goals are as follows: Implementation of the Newcombe & Davison pipeline for a single camera bundle for a prerecorded video, implementation of multi-camera bundle integration and finally a fully functioning implementation that works on live video. Our stretch goal would be to fully implement Perspective SfM and Camera bundle selection without the use of libraries or open-source code. If somehow we still have time, we can consider alternate approaches to mesh construction.


Steps for achieving the goals/Timeline
Implement perspective SfM point capture, Base Mesh creation & Implement view-predictive Optic Flow (calculate flow field between Reference image and a Comparison Image) (March 22)
Implement Base Mesh Refining, Depth Map Denosing & Triangulation (March 29, Goal 1 done)
Implement Model Integration (Goal 2), Perform upgrades to work with live video (Goal 3) & Tie up loose ends (Also start on final report). (April 5)
Implement keyframe & bundle selection without using an existing library (Stretch Goal)


References
R. A. Newcombe and A. J. Davison, "Live dense reconstruction with a single moving camera," 2010 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2010, pp. 1498-1505, doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2010.5539794.


G. Klein and D. Murray, "Parallel Tracking and Mapping for Small AR Workspaces," 2007 6th IEEE and ACM International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, Nara, Japan, 2007, pp. 225-234, doi: 10.1109/ISMAR.2007.4538852.


Ohtake, A. Belyaev, and H.-P. Seidel. A multi-scale approach to 3D scattered data interpolation with compactly supported basis functions. In Proceedings of Shape Modeling International, 2003.
